                                                     Organic Zener Diodes: Tunneling across the Gap in

                                                                       Organic Semiconductor Materials.
arXiv:1010.5743v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 27 Oct 2010




                                                      Hans Kleemann,∗,† Rafael Gutierrez,‡ Frank Lindner,† Stanislav Avdoshenko,‡

                                                       Pedro D. Manrique,‡ Björn Lüssem,‡ Gianaurelio Cuniberti,‡,¶ and Karl Leo†

                                                    Institut für Angewandte Photophysik, Technische Universität Dresden, 01069 Dresden, Germany,
                                                         Institute for Materials Science and Max Bergmann Center for Biomaterials, Technische
                                                         Universität Dresden, 01069 Dresden, Germany, and National Center for Nanomaterials
                                                                        Technology, POSTECH, Pohang 790-784, Republic of Korea

                                                                                        E-mail: Hans.Kleemann@iapp.de



                                                                                                      Abstract

                                                              Organic Zener diodes with a precisely adjustable reverse breakdown from -3 V to -15 V

                                                          without any influence on the forward current-voltage curve are realized. This is accomplished

                                                          by controlling the width of the charge depletion zone in a pin-diode with an accuracy of one

                                                          nanometer independently of the doping concentration and the thickness of the intrinsic layer.

                                                          The breakdown effect with its exponential current voltage behavior and a weak temperature

                                                          dependence is explained by a tunneling mechanism across the HOMO-LUMO gap of neigh-

                                                          boring molecules. The experimental data are confirmed by a minimal Hamiltonian model

                                                          approach, including coherent tunneling and incoherent hopping processes as possible charge

                                                          transport pathways through the effective device region.
                                                       ∗ To whom correspondence should be addressed
                                                       † Institut für Angewandte Photophysik, Technische Universität Dresden, 01069 Dresden, Germany
                                                       ‡ Institute for Materials Science and Max Bergmann Center for Biomaterials, Technische Universität Dresden,

                                                    01069 Dresden, Germany
                                                       ¶ National Center for Nanomaterials Technology, POSTECH, Pohang 790-784, Republic of Korea



                                                                                                          1
   In the last few years, the physical properties of organic semiconductors have been studied
with considerable detail. Despite the fact that there is still a limited understanding of the relevant
microscopic charge transport scenarios in such systems, various organic electronic devices such
as efficient organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) 1,2 , organic memory cells 3 , organic field-effect
transistors 4 , vertical triodes 5 , and high-frequency diodes 6 have been successfully demonstrated.
   The main difference between inorganic and organic semiconductors is that the latter usually do
not display (at room temperature) band-like transport through delocalized states, but rather exhibit
hopping of carriers between spatially localized states. This can either happen as electron transport
through the lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMO) or hole transport through the highest
occupied orbitals (HOMO). Typically, this results in mobilities three or more orders of magnitude
below those of band transport and an entirely different temperature dependence, i.e. an increase of
mobility with increasing temperature can be obtained.
   In inorganic semiconductors, there are a number of basic transport effects which involve more
than one band, e.g. interband (Zener) tunneling or avalanche breakthrough. 7,8 While these effects
are now understood in detail for inorganic semiconductors, they have not been experimentally
studied in detail for organic semiconductors so far. Due to the structural complexity of organic
semiconductors, the theoretical study of their charge transport properties is also quite challenging,
so that theoretical studies are usually limited to structurally ordered systems. 9–12 A key electronic
device based on the Zener effect, the Zener diode, is crucial for basic electrical circuit requirements,
such as voltage- and temperature stabilization and over-voltage protection. An organic Zener diode
with an adjustable breakdown is still missing. Likewise Zener diodes are key elements for passive
matrix memory arrays, 13 where Zener diodes are essential to prevent parasitic current flow through
non-selected crosspoints. The required parameters for the Zener diode are given by the read-, write-
and erase voltages of the memory. 14
   In the Letter, we investigate the HOMO-LUMO Zener tunneling in an organic semiconductor
system by detailed measurements of the reverse currents in organic pin-diodes. In particular, we
provide evidence for the tunneling nature of the reverse currents by showing a strong influence


                                                   2
of the effective tunnel barrier and a very weak temperature dependence. To get a first insight
into the possible charge transport mechanisms, we complement the experimental investigations
by an effective low-dimensional model which is then treated in two limiting physical situations:
incoherent hopping transport and coherent tunneling. Our results suggest that both mechanisms
may exist in the system under study in dependence of the sign of the applied voltage.
   Experimental part. We address Zener tunneling in the reverse current regime of organic pin
diodes. The breakthrough properties of such devices have only been rarely investigated, see e.g. 15
The advantage of the pin-diode concept 16 is that the geometry and the potentials within the semi-
conductor layers can be controlled very precisely, thus allowing to study the tunneling effects,
which sensitively depend on minute variations of these parameters, in a very controlled man-
ner. Thus, the tunneling current is independently tunable by two parameters: the thickness of
the intrinsic interlayer (IIL), and the doping concentration of the electron and hole transport layers
(ETL/HTL). Doping changes the charge carrier concentration 17 and width of depletion regions. 18
Furthermore, one obtains a barrier-free transport until the charge carriers reach the IIL. 19 In con-
trast, the IIL acts as an additional depletion layer and the voltage drop over the pin-junction mainly
occurs in this intrinsic layer. 19 A comparative study of organic pn- and pin-junctions comprising
doped organic layers would be desirable. However, as we will show in this letter the typical width
of the native depletion zone in the doped layers is less than 3 nm. Therefore, the current in a pn-
junction would be caused not only by drift and diffusion but also by a tunneling mechanism. In
this way the backward current should not be tunable independently of the forward direction.
   The structures investigated (see the inset of [figure][1][]1b) consist of three organic layers
sandwiched between two aluminium contacts, which define the active area of 6.38 mm2 . The inner
structure of the organic layers follows the pin-concept with a highly p-type doped HTL, a highly
n-type doped ETL, and an intrinsic layer in between (see Supporting Information for details). [fig-
ure][1][]1 displays the current-voltage (I-V ) characteristics of such a device. In forward direction
the expected diode-like behavior 16 is observed. The interlayer thickness does not affect the onset
and the slope of the current rise in forward direction, which appears at 2.3 V. In contrast, there is a


                                                  3
            (a) 100                                                                                100
                                                                        Interlayer thickness
             Current density [mA/cm ]
            2

                                                                             10 nm                 10

                                               50                            8 nm
                                                                                                   1
                                                                             6 nm


                                                                                                   0.1
                                                0
                                                                                                   0.01


                                                                                                   1E-3
                                               -50

                                                                                                   1E-4


                                              -100                                                 1E-5
                                                 -10    -8     -6     -4    -2      0    2     4

                                                                     Voltage [V]
            (b)
                                              0.40

                                                     Interlayer thickness
                                              0.35
                                                             10 nm
                       Capacitance [µF/cm ]
             2




                                                             8 nm
                                              0.30
                                                             6 nm
                                              0.25


                                              0.20
                                                                                          6
                                              0.15                      5
                                                                                          4
                                                                        3
                                              0.10                                        2
                                                                        1

                                              0.05
                                                 -10    -8     -6     -4    -2      0    2     4

                                                                     Voltage [V]




Figure 1: Current voltage characteristics for different interlayer thicknesses (b) Capacitance volt-
age characteristics (measured at 1 kHz) of the samples shown in [figure][1][]1a. The inset is
a sketch of the device structure and the layers are listed as they are evaporated on a cleaned
glass substrate (1): Al(100nm)(2) /MeO-TPD:F4TCNQ[4wt%](50nm)(3) /Balq2:NPB[50wt%](4)
/Bphen:Cs(50nm)(5) /Al(100nm)(6)


                                                                        4
significant influence on the reverse current, which can be seen in the loss of the rectifying property
at a certain voltage depending on the interlayer thickness. The onset of the reverse breakdown
shifts in a controlled manner to higher negative voltages (from -3 V to -15 V) by increasing the
interlayer thickness (see [figure][1][]1a): we observe a shift of the reverse breakdown voltage of
approximately 1 V by each additional nanometer of IIL thickness. Current densities of more than
300 mA/cm2 in reverse direction can be achieved without limiting reversibility or reproducibility.
Obviously, the large reverse voltage region is dominated by a purely exponential rise of the cur-
rent, which provides a strong hint for a tunneling like mechanism. Also a flat part of the I-V curve
can be observed in reverse direction. Since this is more pronounced for thicker interlayers it is
considered to be related to a leakage currents. Hence, a larger field and a larger voltage are needed
to be in the tunneling regime for thicker interlayers. The limitation of the transport layers and the
injection gives rise to the flattening of the I-V curve for larger negative voltages.
   To further understand these observations, we perform capacitance-voltage (C-V ) measure-
ments, allowing to study the voltage-dependent effects of charge depletion and accumulation in
the IIL and allow correlating layer thicknesses to capacitance values. In our devices, the transport
layers have a larger thickness and a better conductivity in comparison to the IIL which is thus
the dominating RC-element in the stack. Capacitance frequency (C- f ) measurements are done in
order to prove independently the capacitance calculated by the assumption of one dominant RC-
circuit (see Supporting Information). Thus, it is checked that the calculated capacitance at 0 V
corresponds to the assumed interlayer thickness, which means that the IIL is still depleted even
for such thin films and no diffusion of dopants occurs. The C-V curves shown in [figure][1][]1b
obey the Mott-Schottky rule as long as no significant current appears (between 0 V and -4 V, see
Supporting Information). In the forward voltage direction thus, a sudden capacitance drop appears
independently of the IIL thickness at 2.3 V, where the geometrical capacitance dominates the C-V
curves since the flat-band condition is reached. The small drop of capacitance for a small forward
bias is related to the ETL system of cesium doped BPhen. The significant number of trap states in
this material which will be filled under forward voltage conditions causes the drop in capacitance.


                                                   5
As one can see e.g. in [figure][3][]3b this effect does not appear in doped RE68. However, in re-
verse direction, a weak decrease of the capacitance is observed as predicted by the Mott-Schottky
rule. This corresponds to a charge depletion at the HTL/IIL and ETL/IIL interfaces. Besides this,
a drop of the capacitance is obtained as expected from the I-V curves for certain reverse voltages
depending on the IIL thickness caused by a significant injection into the ILL.
   To demonstrate the control of the reverse behavior and to discuss the possible relevant charge
transport mechanisms, we plot in [figure][2][]2 the reverse current for different temperatures and
IIL thicknesses. For decreasing ILL thickness (from 11 nm to 5 nm), a purely exponential current
dependence is observed (for reverse voltages larger than -3 V), with an increase of the reverse
current by nearly six orders of magnitude.
   A further strong evidence of tunneling is the observed temperature dependence: In addition
to the exponential behavior, we find a rather weak influence of the temperature on the reverse
                                                                                 f or
current. In contrast to a typical activation energy of the forward current (Eact =(170±20) meV)
for such a pin-device, 20 a surprisingly small activation energy of Eact
                                                                     rev =(30±10) meV is measured


in the reverse direction, without any voltage dependence (see inset of [figure][2][]2b). This low
reverse activation energy can be interpreted as being related to HOMO-LUMO tunneling processes
which become dominant in this voltage region. The difference between this proposed mechanism
and the effect described by Drechsel et al. 21 can clearly be seen in the weak interlayer thickness
dependence of the backward current reported by Drechsel. This is mainly due to a change in
the injection conditions for majority charge carriers at the schottky contact and not related to a
tunneling of minority charge carriers as reported here. Concerning the activation energy in reverse
direction it should be mentioned that since we can not neglect the influence of the transport layers
to the temperature dependence the real value of activation energy remains elusive. However, even if
the found temperature and interlayer dependences are a strong evidence for a tunneling mechanism
a second effect, the Avalanche breakdown, could also play a role as a possible transport mechanism.
Since we obtain an exponential current-voltage characteristic for different interlayer thicknesses
and for a large voltage region just one kind of these two processes is supposed to be dominant.


                                                 6
            (a)

                                           100
             Current density [mA/cm ]
                                                                      Backward current at -5 V
            2




                                           10


                                            1


                                           0.1


                                        0.01


                                1E-3
                                                   5      6       7         8         9          10          11

                                                             Interlayer thickness [nm]

            (b)

                                                                       100
                Current density [mA/cm ]




                                                                                                        -6V
            2




                                                                        10
                                           10                                                           -5V

                                                                            1
                                                                                                        -4V
                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                        -3V
                                            1
                                                                                4.0   4.5   5.0        5.5   6.0




                                           0.1
                                                       Backward current at -3 V

                                                       Forward current at 2.6 V

                                             3.0       3.5      4.0      4.5          5.0         5.5             6.0
                                                                                            -3    -1
                                                         Inverse temperature [10                 K ]



Figure 2: Current density at a reverse voltage of -5 V for different interlayer thicknesses. Device
structure as in [figure][1][]1 (b) Temperature dependence of the current density in reverse direction
measured at -3 V and in the exponential rise of the forward direction at 2.6 V. The inset shows
the temperature dependence for different backward voltages. The devices consist of Al(100 nm)/
MeO-TPD:NDP2[4 wt%](50nm)/ Balq2:NPB[50 wt%](7nm)/ Bphen:Cs(50 nm)/ Al(100 nm) on
a cleaned glass substrate.

                                                                        7
           (a)
                                       150
            Current density [mA/cm ]            50
                                                25
           2




                                       100
                                                  0

                                        50      -25
                                                -50
                                                   -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4
                                          0


                                        -50                               0.5 wt% p-dopant

                                                                          1 wt% p-dopant

                                       -100                               2 wt% p-dopant

                                                                          4 wt% p-dopant
                                       -150
                                           -8          -6     -4         -2         0       2

                                                                  Voltage [V]
           (b)
                                        30


                                        25
            Capacitance [nF]




                                        20


                                        15


                                        10                         0.5 wt% p-dopant

                                                                   1 wt% p-dopant

                                          5                        2 wt% p-dopant

                                                                   4 wt% p-dopant
                                          0
                                           -5     -4    -3   -2     -1   0      1       2   3   4

                                                                  Voltage [V]



Figure 3: (a) Current density for different doping concentrations in the HTL. The devices consist
of Al(100nm)/ RE68:NDP2[x wt%](50nm)/ RE68(7nm)/ RE68:NDN1[16wt%](50nm)/ Al(100
nm) on a cleaned glass substrate. Inset: comparison of different dopand materials regarding
the I-V performance. The structure consists of a doped HTL(50nm), an intrinsic interlayer
(Balq2:NPB[50wt%] (7nm)) and a doped ETL(50nm). The colors denote (HTL/ETL): Meo-
TPD:F4TCNQ[4wt%]/ BPhen:Cs (light green), Meo-TPD:NDP2[4wt%]/ BPhen:Cs (magenta),
Meo-TPD:NDP2[4wt%]/ BPhen:NDN1[16wt%] (dark blue) (b) Capacitance voltage characteris-
tics of the samples shown in [figure][3][]3a     8
Avalanche and Zener breakdown are distinguishable by the field, which needs to be applied to be
in the breakdown region. 7,8 Thus, for a certain energy gap of the materials used for the diode Zener
tunneling should appear for lower fields than Avalanche multiplication. Since we do not obtain a
second process in the current-voltage curves for higher voltages the Zener effect is supposed to be
the dominant mechanism.
   If one assumes a transport mechanism similar to inorganic Zener diodes, one can further ex-
pect a control of the reverse breakdown by the doping concentration of the transport layers. [fig-
ure][3][]3 shows data a for a diode of RE68 designed as a homojunction: the breakdown voltage
can be shifted to higher values for lower doping concentrations as expected. The reason is a change
of the effective thickness of the intrinsic layer by an additional depletion region at the HTL/IIL
and the IIL/ETL interface. Although the reverse current has a reduced sensitivity to the doping
concentration than to the IIL thickness, this allows a second independent approach to control the
breakdown voltage. Furthermore, we also obtain no influence on the forward direction of the diode,
which means that neither the series resistance of the transport layers nor the flat-band condition
have been significantly changed.
   C-V spectroscopy investigations (see [figure][3][]3b) once more reveal a Mott-Schottky like
behavior for different doping concentrations. Obviously, there is an increase of the capacitance for
a decreasing concentration of dopant molecules. Hence, if the thickness of the depletion layer is
calculated from the capacitance, one obtains e.g. 8.3 nm for the 4 wt% of dopants and 11.3 nm for
the 0.5 wt% of dopants (including the IIL thickness of 7 nm). This means that the depletion region
thickness is the sum of the IIL and the interface depletion thickness, being sensitive to the doping
concentration. We obtain a similar rule as mentioned before in case of the thickness controlled
reverse current: the reverse breakdown can be shifted by 1 V or the reverse current can be increased
by one order of magnitude by adding one additional nanometer to the thickness of the depletion
layer (IIL plus interface depletion). This doping controlled reverse behavior can also be obtained
for various concentrations of n-type dopants in ETL without any noticeable difference. Instead of
NDN1 one can use cesium as a freely available n-type dopant (see Supporting Information).


                                                 9
   Theoretical Modeling. The IIL part of the device is not expected to have an ordered crystalline
structure, but rather display a high degree of static and dynamic disorder. Since the spatial arrange-
ment of the molecular building blocks in the IIL is not known a priori, a first-principle description
of the IIL electronic structure as well as of charge migration 9–11 in such a system represents a very
strong challenge. Hence, to gain a first qualitative insight into the possible charge transport path-
ways, we have adopted a minimal model approach. Basically, the model consists of an electronic
ladder with N blocks describing the IIL, each block containing two energy levels ε sj (V ) whose en-
ergetic position is determined not only by the intrinsic electronic structure of a molecular building
block but also by the built in field and by the applied voltage (see inset of [figure][4][]4). The
Hamilton operator for this tight-binding model can be written as:


                  H =       ∑ ∑ ε sj(V )d +ds j + ∑ t s ∑ (ds+j ds j+1 + h.c.)
                           s=H,L j                    s=H,L     j
                      +     H−L
                           tA    ∑      +
                                     (dH j dL j+1 + h.c.) + tBH−L
                                                                    ∑  (dH+ j dL j+2 + h.c.)
                                   j                                 j
                      +      ∑     εkα ckα ckα +
                                        +
                                                     ∑       ∑    tk,α, j,s (c+
                                                                              kα ds j + h.c.).    (1)
                           k,α=l,r                k,α=l,r j,s=H,L


   The levels are denoted by s = H (highest occupied molecular orbital, HOMO) and L (lowest-
unoccupied molecular orbital, LUMO) and are thus representative of the frontier orbitals of a
given molecular unit. Their energetic position is assumed to be given by the linear relation:
ε sj (V ) = ε s − κ j + Nj eV , where ε s is the bare onsite energy of the molecular orbital (assumed
to be site- independent for simplicity). The local H-L gap ∆H−L = ε H − ε L ∼ 3.0eV is taken from
the experimental energy diagram profiles. The built-in electric field is modeled as a linear ramp
with slope −κ, which is supported by the current experiments as well as by photo-electron spec-
troscopy measurements in organic pin-diodes. 19 The second, third, and fourth summands in Eq. 1
describe different electronic couplings within the ladder: intra- strand nearest-neighbor couplings
(second term) as well as nearest- and next-nearest neighbor inter-strand interactions (third and
fourth terms). If not stated otherwise, we will assume for the sake of simplicity in the calculations
t H = t L = t0 and tAH−L and tBH−L = ηt0 , with 0 ≤ η < 1. All electronic parameters can in princi-


                                                     10
ple be obtained from microscopic first-principle calculations; this goes however beyond the scope
of the present minimal model approach. The last row in Eq. 1 describes the electronic structure
of the α = l (left) and r (right) electrodes and the coupling between them and the ladder. The
specific electronic properties of the electrodes will not appear explicitly in our treatment; they are
considered only as sinks of charges and will be included in the calculations via phenomenologi-
cal parameters. The electrode-ladder interaction, given by the tkα,s j matrix elements is in general
not limited to the ladder sites nearest to the electrodes but it can have a longer range. This will
qualitatively account for the fact that the real structural molecular arrangement in the active region
does not in general have a linear chain topology −it is expected to rather be a complex network−
so that interactions do not necessarily have to be confined to the electrodes’ nearest neighboring
molecular blocks.
    The Ansatz for ε sj (V ) allows to account qualitatively for two different physical scenarios: with
increasing V > 0, the built-in field κ can be progressively counter-acted by the voltage-dependent
term ( j/N)eV , the energy levels become increasingly aligned and the current can dramatically
grow due to the reduction of tunnel barriers between the sites. For negative bias, transport is
blocked up to a critical bias −V ∗ ; the energy scale |eV ∗ | is roughly related to the situation where the
H-level at a site j and the L-level at site j + 1 become nearly resonant (additionally, at least the first
site of the H-strand should move above the left chemical potential in order to have a current flow).
Once this happens, an exponential current onset can occur. We have used two different modeling
strategies based on two possible different microscopic transport mechanisms: hopping transport
(HT) and coherent tunneling (CT). HT seems to be reasonable, since it is expected that the active
device region displays some degree of static and dynamic disorder which may suppress coherent
tunneling pathways over long distances. We have used a reduced density matrix approach 22 (for
HT) and the Landauer formalism 23 to compute the I-V characteristics of the model in the CT
regime (see the Supporting Information for details of the calculation).
    The results (scaled by an arbitrary factor) are displayed in [figure][4][]4 in comparison with the
experiments. It is obvious that the weak (strong) thickness dependence for positive (negative) volt-


                                                    11
Figure 4: Calculated I-V curves in the (a) hopping and (b) coherent transport regimes compared
with the measured characteristics. The inset shows a schematic drawing of the two legs electronic
ladder used to model charge transport in the device. The basic model parameters are: (a) t0 =150
meV, tAH−L =50 meV, tBH−L =0, ΓLl = ΓH     H      L
                                      r = Γl = Γr =25 meV, and κ=0.5, 0.37 and 0.27 eV for N=3,
4, and 5; (b) t0 =150 meV, tAH−L =150 meV, tBH−L =50 meV, ΓLl = ΓH     H     L
                                                                 r = Γl = Γr =100 meV, β =1.2,
and κ=0.66, 0.6 and 0.55 eV for N=6, 7, and 8. For a definition of the model parameters we also
refer the reader to the Supporting Information.




                                               12
ages can be qualitatively described within both transport regimes. Notice, however, the different
number of sites needed in both regimes to account for the experimental curves, This is related to the
fact that tunneling processes can still be efficient for short lengths, so that almost no zero-current
gap is obtained. Only with increasing length tunneling transport is blocked at low bias.
    Some basic features of the transport process can be summarized as follows: for positive volt-
ages the onset of current takes place approximately at the critical bias where the first site of the
HOMO-strand moves above the left chemical potential µl (which is kept fixed at µl = EF while
µr = EF + eV ). Under this condition, charge transport can take place. A further increase of the bias
leads to an increase of the current till all the electronic levels along the ladder become aligned (the
external potential cancels the built-in field κ). This provides the maximum current in this model;
for larger positive voltages the misalignment of the levels develops again and negative differential
resistance can eventually be obtained. For negative voltages, the current is almost zero in the case
of coherent tunneling, since this process is very sensitive to the presence of energy gaps along the
ladder. This behavior can be lifted by allowing for long-range interactions between the electrodes
and the ladder states (see Eq. 7 in the Supporting Information). On the contrary, hopping transport
can also take place in the negative bias regime with only nearest-neighbor interactions.
    Our results suggest that the effective microscopic transport mechanism may include both HT
and CT contributions, each of them becoming dominant in different voltage regions. This may be
the reason for the different slopes in the I(V = const., T ) vs. T −1 plots for positive and negative
voltages ([figure][2][]2). A pure CT model cannot account for a T -dependence; HT contributions
can however explain it. In the HT regime, a different qualitative behavior for positive and negative
voltages is expected on the basis of a simple argument: the nearest neighbor inter-site hopping rates
within the ladder include (see Eq. 4 in the Supporting Information) thermal factors exp(−(ε sj+1 −
ε jp )/kB T ), whenever ε sj+1 − ε jp > 0 (s, p = H, L). For s 6= p (sites on different strands), one obtains
ε sj+1 −ε jp = ∆H−L −κ +eV /N; from here it is obvious that for V > 0 the temperature dependence is
mainly determined by the gap ∆H−L  kB T (large slope). For negative bias, ∆H−L can be partially
compensated by the term −κ − e|V |/N and thus the temperature dependence may be weakened.


                                                     13
A more accurate quantitative analysis requires a systematic experimental study of the temperature
dependence, taking also the influence of the transport layers into account.
   Conclusions. In this Letter, we unambiguously observe signatures of Zener tunneling in a
organic molecular semiconductor: The reverse currents in organic pin-diodes show geometry, field
and temperature dependence in excellent agreement with this tunneling effect not observed so far in
such systems. The realized pin-Zener diodes have excellent device properties and allow important
application possibilities, e.g. to reduce crosstalk in passive matrix arrays. The basic effect of
valence- to conduction-level tunneling could be used in further device concepts, such as devices
employing tunable resonant tunneling. Using a minimal model Hamiltonian, we can describe
semi-quantitatively the measured electrical response. However, both limiting cases investigated
here, incoherent hopping or coherent tunneling, can describe the observed experimental features. It
therefore seems appealing to expect that the dominant charge transport mechanism may sensitively
depend on the sign of the applied bias. A further point to be considered is the coupling to dynamical
degrees of freedom which may induce polaron formation, so that the transport process will be
rather mediated by dressed electrons or holes. We have not taken these issues in our model which
is only addressing electronic degrees of freedom. Further work in this direction including detailed
first-principle electronic structure calculations is thus needed.


Acknowledgement

The authors thank Novaled AG, the free state of Saxony and EU (EFRE) for financial support under
project NKOE (12712) and Novaled for providing the HTL dopant NDP2 and the ETL dopant
NDN1. This work was also supported by the Volkswagen Foundation through grant no. I/78-340,
by the cluster of excellence of the Free State of Saxony European Center for Emerging Materials
and Processes Dresden ECEMP/A2, and by WCU (World Class University) program through the
Korea Science and Engineering Foundation funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and
Technology (Project No. R31-2008-000-10100-0).




                                                  14
References

 (1) Tang, C. W.; VanSlyke, S. A. Appl. Phys. Lett. 1987, 51, 913.

 (2) Burroughes, J. H.; Bradley, D. D. C.; Brown, A. R.; Marks, R. N.; Mackay, K.; Friend, R. H.;
     Burns, P. L.; Holmes, A. B. Nature 1990, 347, 539.

 (3) Ouyang, J.; Chu, C.; Szmanda, C. R.; Ma, L.; Yang, Y. Nature 2004, 3, 918–922.

 (4) Horowitz, G. Adv. Mat. 1998, 10, 365–377.

 (5) Yang, Y.; Heeger, A. J. Nature 1994, 372, 344–346.

 (6) Steudel, S.; K. Myny and, V. A.; Deibel, C.; de Vusser, S.; Genoe, J.; Heremans, P. Nat. Mat.
     2005, 4, 597–600.

 (7) Sze, S. M.; Gibbons, G. Appl. Phys. Lett. 1966, 8, 111.

 (8) McAfee, K. B.; Ryder, E. J.; Shockley, W.; Sparks, M. Phys. Rev. 1951, 83, 650–651.

 (9) Vehoff, T.; Chung, Y. S.; Johnston, K.; Troisi, A.; Yoon, D. Y.; Andrienko, D. The Journal of
     Physical Chemistry C 2010, 114, 10592.

(10) Troisi, A.; Cheung, D. L.; Andrienko, D. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 102, 116602.

(11) Grozema, F. C.; Siebbeles, L. D. A. International Reviews in Physical Chemistry 2008, 27,
     87–138.

(12) Ortmann, F.; Bechstedt, F.; Hannewald, K. Phys. Rev. B 2009, 79, 235206.

(13) Scott, J. D.; Bozano, L. D. Adv. Mat. 2007, 19, 1452.

(14) Lindner, F.; Walzer, K.; Leo, K. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2008, 93, 233305.

(15) Liang, G.; Cui, T.; Varahramyan, K. Micro. Eng. 2003, 65, 279–284.




                                               15
(16) Harada, K.; Werner, A. G.; Pfeiffer, M.; Bloom, C. J.; Elliott, C. M.; Leo, K. Phys. Rev. Lett.
     2005, 94, 033601.

(17) Walzer, K.; Maennig, B.; Pfeiffer, M.; Leo, K. Chem. Rev. 2007, 107, 1233.

(18) Blochwitz, J.; Fritz, T.; Pfeiffer, M.; Leo, K.; Alloway, D.; Lee, P.; Armstrong, N. Org.
     Electron. 2001, 2, 97.

(19) Olthof, S.; Meerheim, R.; Schober, M.; Leo, K. Phys. Rev. B 2009, 79, 245308.

(20) Maennig, B.; Pfeiffer, M.; Nollau, A.; Zhou, X.; Leo, K. Phys. Rev. B 2001, 64, 195208.

(21) Drechsel, J.; Pfeiffer, M.; Zhou, X.; Nollau, A.; Leo, K. Syn. Met. 2002, 127, 201–205.

(22) Blum, K. Plenum Press 1996.

(23) Datta, S. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1995.




Supporting Information Available

The Supporting Information Section includes preparation methods, additional I-V , C-V , C- f and
Mott-Schottky-curves for the free available materials. Furthermore we present a more detailed
description of the microscopic model applied to describe the charge transport characteristics in the
organic Zener diode.
   This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org/.




                                                16
                                                     Organic Zener Diodes: Tunneling across the Gap in

                                                                                 Organic Semiconductors
arXiv:1010.5743v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 27 Oct 2010




                                                    Hans Kleemann,∗,† Rafael Guitierrez,‡ Frank Lindner,† Pedro D. Manrique,‡ Björn

                                                                          Lüssem,‡ Gianaurelio Cuniberti,‡,¶ and Karl Leo†

                                                    Institut für Angewandte Photophysik, Technische Universität Dresden, 01069 Dresden, Germany,
                                                         Institute for Materials Science and Max Bergmann Center for Biomaterials, Technische
                                                         Universität Dresden, 01069 Dresden, Germany, and National Center for Nanomaterials
                                                                        Technology, POSTECH, Pohang 790-784, Republic of Korea

                                                                                        E-mail: Hans.Kleemann@iapp.de




                                                    Supporting Information

                                                    Experimental Methods

                                                    Preparation. The devices are prepared on cleaned (supersonic treatment in acetone, ethanol and
                                                    isopropanol for 5 minutes and O2 plasma etching) glass substrate by thermal evaporation of metals
                                                    and organic materials under high-vacuum conditions (base pressure < 10−5 Pa) without breaking
                                                    the vacuum. The layer evaporation is done in the following sequence: Aluminium (bottom con-
                                                    tact, thickness 50 nm), HTL (50 nm), IIL, ETL (50 nm), Aluminium (top contact 50 nm). The
                                                    thicknesses are confirmed by quartz crystal monitoring and the active area is 6.38 mm2 .
                                                       ∗ To whom correspondence should be addressed
                                                       † Institut für Angewandte Photophysik, Technische Universität Dresden, 01069 Dresden, Germany
                                                       ‡ Institute for Materials Science and Max Bergmann Center for Biomaterials, Technische Universität Dresden,

                                                    01069 Dresden, Germany
                                                       ¶ National Center for Nanomaterials Technology, POSTECH, Pohang 790-784, Republic of Korea



                                                                                                          1
   The main materials used are: MeO-TPD: N,N,N9,N9 tetrakis (4-methoxyphenyl)- benzidine.
NPB: N,N9- di(naphthalen-1-yl)- N,N9)-diphenyl- benzidine. BAlq2: aluminium- (III)bis (2-
methyl-8-quninolinato)- phenylphenolate. Bphen: 4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline. RE68: Tris
(1-phenylisoquinoline) iridium(III). For the p-type doping, of the HTL the material NDP2 (No-
valed AG, Dresden) can be used as well as the material F4TCNQ: 2,3,5,6- tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-
tetracyanoquino- dimethane as freely available p-dopant giving equivalent electrical properties (see
[figure][1][]1). The n-type doping of the ETL can be achieved by co-evaporation of Bphen and pure
Caesium. Likewise, the material NDN1 (Novaled AG, Dresden) acts as an effective n-type dopant
(see [figure][1][]1).
   For the electronic characterization a Keithley 2400 SMU is used for I-V investigations while a
HP 4284 LCR-meter is used for the C-V and C- f studies. The I-V curves are done with a voltage
sweep (from -10V to 4V and back) and the C-V measurements are prepared at 1 kHz with an
alternating sine signal (RMS value) of 20 mV.
   Organic Zener diode with different molecular dopants. Owing to the highly efficient doping of
the hole and electron transport layers, the organic Zener diode becomes a reproducible and stable
device with a low series resistance. Also, doping provides a second independent way to control the
reverse behaviour. We can show (see Figure 1), that the effect of the reverse breakdown appears in-
dependently of the used dopant. However, due to the different efficiencies of the dopant materials,
one can observe an influence of the used dopants on the reverse direction. The number of charged
dopant states at the interface between the doped layers and the intrinsic interlayer determines the
thickness of the depletion region which controls the reverse current. Accordingly, one can further
extract from Figure 1 that the molecular doping of MeO-TPD by F4TCNQ is less efficient than by
NDP2 (for the same mass-ratio,corresponding to a molar percentage of approximately 8mol% for
F4TCNQ and 6mol% for NDP2, respectively). Nevertheless, the series resistance of the transport
layers is not significantly affected and hence no change in the forward direction is obtained.
   C-f and C-V investigations. In the frequency range from 50Hz to 1MHz, the organic Zener
diode provides a phase and impedance response (see Figure 2 a) which fits to a simple RC-unit


                                                 2
                                                     50
                                                                       10




                                                             Current [mA]
                          Current density [mA/cm ]
                         2
                                                                            5

                                                                            0
                                                     25
                                                                            -5

                                                                  -10
                                                                    -4              -2      0        2
                                                      0


                                                                                  p-dopant in HTL , n-dopant in ETL
                                                     -25                             F4-TCNQ (4 wt%), Cs

                                                                                     NDP2 (4 wt%), Cs

                                                                                     NDP2 (4 wt%), NDN1 (16 wt%)

                                                     -50
                                                        -8                  -6        -4        -2       0   2        4
                                                                                           Voltage [V]



Figure 1: I-V curves for different p-type and n-type dopants. The device consists of an intrinsic
interlayer (7nm) of Balq2:NPB sandwiched between a hole and an electron transport layer (both
50nm) of MeO-TPD and Bphen, respectively. The inset shows the I-V curve of a commercial
inorganic silicon Zener diode with a breakdown voltage of 2.7V.


as the equivalent circuit. Since the doped transport layers have a small series resistance and also
a small geometrical capacitance (thickness 50nm) the RC-unit belongs to the intrinsic interlayer,
which has the dominant RC-time in this stack (inset of Figure 2 a). One can thus identify the
capacitance with the geometrical thickness of the depleted area. The series resistance describes
Ohmic losses along the contacts and the transport layers, while the resistance parallel to the ca-
pacitor models the influence of charge recombination and leakage currents for the reverse biased
junction. This correlation between the capacitance and the thickness of the depletion, which is
the sum of the interlayer thickness and the interface depletion, can be seen in Figure 2 b. For a
reverse voltage between 0V and -6V we obtain a linear dependence in the Mott- Schottky plot.
This means, the C-V curves follow

                                                                                   2 NA + ND
                                                       1/C2 =                                 (V −Vbi ) + di2 .           (1)
                                                                                 eεε0 A ND NA

Here, NA and ND are the densities of charged dopant states, di is the IIL thickness, A the active
device area, V the applied voltage, and Vbi the built-in voltage of the diode. Accordingly, there is
a voltage dependent depletion at the interfaces between the transport layers and the intrinsic inter-


                                                                                                3
                      (a)
                                         100

                                                                                              100
                                          80




                                                                                                    Impedance [k
                           |Phase| [°]




                                                                                              10
                                          60

                                                                                              1
                                          40

                                                                                              0.1




                                                                                                    ]
                                          20


                                                    0.1        1          10     100   1000

                                                               Frequency [kHz]
                     (b)

                                         0.008


                                         0.007
                       [nF ]
                      -2




                                         0.006
                      2
                       1/C




                                         0.005


                                         0.004


                                               -8         -6         -4        -2       0

                                                                   Voltage [V]



Figure 2: C-f and C-V curves of the organic Zener diode. (a) C-f measurements of the or-
ganic Zener diode. In accordance to the frequency dependence of the phase and the impedance
one can assume a simple RC-unit as the equivalent circuit (inset). (b) Mott-Schottky plot of
the device shown in (a). The device consists of Al(100nm)/ MeO-TPD:F4TCNQ[4wt%](50nm)/
Balq2:NPB[50wt%](7nm)/ Bphen:Cs(50nm)/ Al(100 nm)




                                                                       4
layer as predicted by the Mott-Schottky rule. This means that the assumption of two rectangular
space charge regions separated by an intrinsic layer is fulfilled in our pin-structure. With respect
to this, we can expect a linear voltage drop over the intrinsic layer. It should be further mentioned
that the Mott-Schottky rule is not valid for the forward biased device and also in the range of high
negative voltages. The contributions of drift, diffusion current and recombination processes, which
are not taken into account in this simple model, cause a collapse of the assumed equivalent circuit.


Theoretical Methods

Using the model introduced in the main text, Eq. 1, we can formally treat different transport scenar-
ios. In the following we will address two limiting cases: incoherent, thermally assisted transport
and coherent tunneling.
   Incoherent transport. The model in Eq. 1 has been applied to calculate the I-V characteristics
for different lengths N. We may expect that static and dynamical disorder in the active region
will make a fully coherent transport scenario very unlikely. Only for narrow regions (short length
scales) quasi-coherent transport might still be efficient, though this may also depend on the voltage
region. The electrical response of the ladder will thus be first studied in the limit of complete
coherence loss. For this, a reduced density matrix approach 1 has been used and only its diagonal
components (site populations) will be considered. Off-diagonal terms are assumed to have decayed
on any relevant time scale. As a result, a set of classical rate equations can be derived (setting in
this case the next nearest neighbor coupling tBH−L to zero, but keeping tAH−L 6= 0):

d                                                                 
   PH,n (t) = Γ1,n f1 (εnH ) − PH,n (t) + Γ2,n f2 (εnH ) − PH,n (t) + γHH,n+1 PH,n+1 (t) + γHH,n−1 PH,n−1 (t)
dt
            + γHL,n−1 PL,n−1 (t) + γHL,n+1 PL,n+11 (t) − (γHH,n−1 + γHH,n+1 + γHL,n−1 + γHL,n+1 ) PH,n (t)
d                                                                 
   PL,n (t) = Γ1,n f1 (εnL ) − PL,n (t) + Γ2,n f2 (εnL ) − PL,n (t) + γLL,n+1 PL,n+1 (t) + γLL,n−1 PL,n−1 (t)
dt
            + γLH,n−1 PH,n−1 (t) + γLH,n+1 PH,n+11 (t) − (γLL,n−1 + γLL,n+1 + γLH,n−1 + γLH,n+1 ) PL,n (t).

                                                                                                           (2)



                                                  5
   Here, PH,n (t) and PL,n (t) are the corresponding populations and the transition rates γ can be
expressed in terms of the tight-binding hopping parameters along the ladder of the model Hamilto-
nian in Eq. 1 (main text). fs=1,2 (εnH,L ) are equilibrium Fermi functions of the electrodes evaluated
at energies εnH,L . The parameters Γsn = Γs,n=m describe phenomenologically the charge hopping
rates into and out of the electrodes and can be formally expressed via the coupling terms tkα,s j us-
ing Fermi’s Golden Rule. Assuming them to be energy-independent constants within the so called
wide-band limit, 2 we make the following Ansatz:


            Γl,nm = δn1 δm1 ΓH
                             l ,                Γr,nm = δn=N δm=N ΓH
                                                                   r                   if n ∈ H strand

            Γl,nm = δn=N+1 δm=N+1 ΓLl , Γr,nm = δn=2N δm=2N ΓLr                         if n ∈ L strand.   (3)


For the hopping rates we further assume: 3

                                                          p
                                             ε ps (V )−εm (V )
                                    sp 2 −
                       γsp, j = (t ) e               kB T        if ε ps (V ) − εmp (V ) > 0,

                       γsp, j = (t sp )2                         if ε ps (V ) − εmp (V ) < 0,              (4)


where s and p denote the H or L strands, while n, m are site indexes along the strands or between
them. Depending on the energy difference between the sites there may be an energetic barrier to
climb or an activation-less hopping process. In the stationary regime, dPH,n /dt = dPL,n /dt = 0,
and a linear set of equations for the populations can be obtained. Finally, using the definition of
the stationary electrical current coming from lead α, Iα (V ) = −e < dNα /dt >, one finally gets

                         e H                                                        
              Itot (V ) =   Γr fr (εNH ,V ) − PH,N (V ) + ΓLr fr (εNL ,V ) − PL,N (V )
                         h̄
                         e H                                                       
                       −    Γl fl (ε1H ,V ) − P1,H (V ) + ΓLl fl (ε1L ,V ) − P1,L (V ) .                   (5)
                         h̄

Coherent tunneling. To explore to which degree coherent charge propagation could contribute to
the observed length dependence of the I-V characteristics, we have also used the Landauer theory 2
for the model of Eq. 1. Hereby, the key quantity to be computed is the energy dependent quantum


                                                         6
mechanical transmission probability T (E), which encodes the electronic structure of the system as
well as the coupling to the electrodes. T (E) can be computed according to the standard expression
T (E) = Tr[Ga (E)Γr Gr (E)Γl ]. Gr,a (E) denote retarded (advanced) ladder Green functions includ-
ing the interaction with the electrodes. The electrode-system coupling matrices Γl,r are defined
below in 7. The Green functions can be calculated via Dyson’s equation. 4 The electrical current
through the system is then obtained (with µl = EF and µr = EF + eV being the chemical potentials
of the electrodes) as:

                                         Z
                                    2e
                          I(V ) =            dE [ f (E − µl ) − f (E − µr )] T (E).               (6)
                                    h

However, in order to have a non-zero current for negative voltages, it turned out that coupling
beyond nearest neighbors, i.e. tBH−L 6= 0, as well as a long-range coupling Γl,r to the electrodes was
required. The latter was now modeled as:


                                   βn              H β (N−n)
                   Γl,nm = δnm ΓH
                                l e , Γr,nm = δnm Γr e       if n ∈ H strand

                   Γl,nm = δnm ΓLl eβ n , Γr,nm = δnm ΓLr eβ (N−n) if n ∈ L strand.               (7)


The reason for the strong current suppression at negative biases is related to the fact that in a
Stark-ladder (linear slope in the onsite energy profile along the chain) as that used in the present
calculations all electronic states are localized in the thermodynamic limit, so that for negative
bias (where the slope of the ladder is very large) charge tunneling is essentially blocked. The
calculated I-V curves are shown in the main text, see Fig. 4. The theoretical curves were scaled
by an arbitrary factor, since the experiments measure current densities and in our approach only
currents are calculated. Hence, a direct quantitative comparison between theory and experiments
turns out to be very difficult in general. Nevertheless, the trends in the length dependence can also
be approximately described by using this coherent transport model.
   In general, it may also be possible that both coherent and incoherent pathways are competing
on different bias regimes. To clear this point requires however a more detailed microscopic study

                                                       7
which should include a first-principle estimation of the different parameters used in the model as
well as the inclusion of a realistic arrangement of the molecular units in the device region.


References

(1) Blum, K. Plenum Press 1996.

(2) Datta, S. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1995.

(3) Nenashev, A. V.; Jansson, F.; Baranovskii, S. D.; Österbacka, R.; Vurechenskii, A. V.; Geb-
    hard, F. Phys. Rev. B 2010, 81, 115203.

(4) Ryndyk, A.; Gutierrez, R.; Song, B.; Cuniberti, G. Springer Series in Chemical Physics 2009,
    93, 213.




                                                 8
